1. iTransformer: Inverted Transformers Are Effective for Time Series Forecasting: (https://openreview.net/forum?id=JePfAI8fah)

    The recent boom of linear forecasting models questions the ongoing passion for architectural modifications of Transformer-based forecasters. These forecasters leverage Transformers to model the global dependencies over temporal tokens of time series, with each token formed by multiple variates of the same timestamp. However, Transformers are challenged in forecasting series with larger lookback windows due to performance degradation and computation explosion. Besides, the embedding for each temporal token fuses multiple variates that represent potential delayed events and distinct physical measurements, which may fail in learning variate-centric representations and result in meaningless attention maps. In this work, we reflect on the competent duties of Transformer components and repurpose the Transformer architecture without any modification to the basic components. We propose iTransformer that simply applies the attention and feed-forward network on the inverted dimensions. Specifically, the time points of individual series are embedded into variate tokens which are utilized by the attention mechanism to capture multivariate correlations; meanwhile, the feed-forward network is applied for each variate token to learn nonlinear representations. The iTransformer model achieves state-of-the-art on challenging real-world datasets, which further empowers the Transformer family with promoted performance, generalization ability across different variates, and better utilization of arbitrary lookback windows, making it a nice alternative as the fundamental backbone of time series forecasting. Code is available at this repository: https://github.com/thuml/iTransformer.

    [GitHub](https://github.com/thuml/iTransformer)

2. CLEX: Continuous Length Extrapolation for Large Language Models (https://openreview.net/forum?id=wXpSidPpc5)

    Transformer-based Large Language Models (LLMs) are pioneering advances in many natural language processing tasks, however, their exceptional capabilities are restricted within the preset context window of Transformer. Position Embedding (PE) scaling methods, while effective in extending the context window to a specific length, demonstrate either notable limitations in their extrapolation abilities or sacrificing partial performance within the context window. Length extrapolation methods, although theoretically capable of extending the context window beyond the training sequence length, often underperform in practical long-context applications. To address these challenges, we propose Continuous Length EXtrapolation (CLEX) for LLMs. We generalise the PE scaling approaches to model the continuous dynamics by ordinary differential equations over the length scaling factor, thereby overcoming the constraints of current PE scaling methods designed for specific lengths. Moreover, by extending the dynamics to desired context lengths beyond the training sequence length, CLEX facilitates the length extrapolation with impressive performance in practical tasks. We demonstrate that CLEX can be seamlessly incorporated into LLMs equipped with Rotary Position Embedding, such as LLaMA and GPT-NeoX, with negligible impact on training and inference latency. Experimental results reveal that CLEX can effectively extend the context window to over 4× or almost 8× training length, with no deterioration in performance. Furthermore, when evaluated on the practical LongBench benchmark, our model trained on a 4k length exhibits competitive performance against state-of-the-art open-source models trained on context lengths up to 32k. Our code is available at https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/CLEX.

3. Linear Log-Normal Attention with Unbiased Concentration (https://openreview.net/forum?id=5nM2AHzqUj)

    Transformer models have achieved remarkable results in a wide range of applications. However, their scalability is hampered by the quadratic time and memory complexity of the self-attention mechanism concerning the sequence length. This limitation poses a substantial obstacle when dealing with long documents or high-resolution images. In this work, we study the self-attention mechanism by analyzing the distribution of the attention matrix and its concentration ability. Furthermore, we propose instruments to measure these quantities and introduce a novel self-attention mechanism, Linear Log-Normal Attention, designed to emulate the distribution and concentration behavior of the original self-attention. Our experimental results on popular natural language benchmarks reveal that our proposed Linear Log-Normal Attention outperforms other linearized attention alternatives, offering a promising avenue for enhancing the scalability of transformer models.

4. The Hedgehog & the Porcupine: Expressive Linear Attentions with Softmax Mimicry (https://openreview.net/forum?id=4g02l2N2Nx)

    Linear attentions have shown promise for improving Transformer efficiency, reducing attention's quadratic complexity to linear in sequence length. This holds exciting promise for (1) training linear Transformers from scratch, (2) `inetuned-conversion of task-specific Transformers into linear versions that recover task performance, and (3) pretrained-conversion of Transformers, such as language models, into linear versions readily finetunable on downstream tasks. However, linear attentions often underperform compared to standard softmax attention. To close this performance gap, we study the behaviors of softmax and linear attentions in various train-from-scratch and finetuned-conversion settings. We find prior linear attentions lack key properties of softmax attention tied to good performance: low-entropy (or spiky) weights and dot-product monotonicity. We further observe surprisingly simple feature maps that retain these properties match softmax performance, but are inefficient to compute in linear attention. We thus propose Hedgehog, a learnable linear attention that retains the spiky and monotonic properties of softmax attention while maintaining linear complexity. Hedgehog uses simple, trainable MLPs to produce attention weights mimicking softmax attention. Experiments show Hedgehog recovers over 99% of standard Transformer performance in train-from-scratch and finetuned-conversion settings, outperforming prior linear attentions by up to 6 perplexity points on WikiText-103 when training causal GPT models from scratch, and up to 8.7 GLUE score points when converting finetuned bidirectional BERT models. Hedgehog also enables pretrained-conversion. Converting a pretrained GPT-2 into a linear attention variant achieves state-of-the-art 16.7 perplexity on WikiText-103 for 125M subquadratic decoder models. We finally turn a pretrained Llama-2 7B into a viable linear attention Llama. With low-rank adaptation, Hedgehog-Llama-2 7B achieves 28.1 higher ROUGE-1 points over the base standard attention model, where prior linear attentions lead to 16.5 point drops.

5. Spatio-Temporal Approximation: A Training-Free SNN Conversion for Transformers (https://openreview.net/forum?id=XrunSYwoLr)

    Spiking neural networks (SNNs) are energy-efficient and hold great potential for large-scale inference. Since training SNNs from scratch is costly and has limited performance, converting pretrained artificial neural networks (ANNs) to SNNs is an attractive approach that retains robust performance without additional training data and resources. However, while existing conversion methods work well on convolution networks, emerging Transformer models introduce unique mechanisms like self-attention and test-time normalization, leading to non-causal non-linear interactions unachievable by current SNNs. To address this, we approximate these operations in both temporal and spatial dimensions, thereby providing the first SNN conversion pipeline for Transformers. We propose \textit{Universal Group Operators} to approximate non-linear operations spatially and a \textit{Temporal-Corrective Self-Attention Layer} that approximates spike multiplications at inference through an estimation-correction approach. Our algorithm is implemented on a pretrained ViT-B/32 from CLIP, inheriting its zero-shot classification capabilities, while improving control over conversion losses. To our knowledge, this is the first direct training-free conversion of a pretrained Transformer to a purely event-driven SNN, promising for neuromorphic hardware deployment.

    [GitHub](https://github.com/ViviaHu/STA)
